
Question 1: Define Data Quality in the context of ETL pipelines. Why is it more than 
just data cleaning? 
● Definition: In ETL, Data Quality refers to the fitness of data for its intended purpose. 
It ensures the data is accurate, complete, consistent, reliable, and timely for 
downstream applications like reporting and analytics. 
● Why it's more than cleaning: While cleaning focuses on fixing errors (like correcting 
typos), Data Quality encompasses a broader set of activities including validation 
against business rules, ensuring referential integrity, handling missing values 
strategically, and monitoring data health over time. 


Question 2: Explain why poor data quality leads to misleading dashboards and 
incorrect decisions. Poor data quality (such as duplicate entries, incorrect values, or 
missing fields) feeds inaccurate information into dashboards. Since decision-makers rely on 
these visualizations to track KPIs and trends, flawed data can lead to: 
● Overestimated Revenue: Duplicate sales transactions can artificially inflate reported 
income. 
● Incorrect Customer Insights: Inaccurate customer data can lead to ineffective 
marketing strategies. 
● Operational Failures: Decisions based on false inventory levels or supply chain 
data can cause stockouts or overstocking. 


Question 3: What is duplicate data? Explain three causes in ETL pipelines. 
● Duplicate Data: Records that represent the same real-world entity or event more 
than once in a dataset. 
● Causes: 
1. Multiple Source Systems: Merging data from different systems (e.g., CRM 
and ERP) that both record the same customer or transaction. 
2. System Glitches: Retries during the extraction process where the same 
batch of data is pulled twice. 
3. Human Error: Manual entry errors where the same record is keyed in 
multiple times. 



Question 4: Differentiate between exact, partial, and fuzzy duplicates. 
● Exact Duplicates: All fields in two or more rows are identical (e.g., same Transaction 
ID, Date, Amount, and Customer). 
● Partial Duplicates: Some key fields are identical, but others differ (e.g., same 
Customer ID and Transaction Date, but different Transaction IDs due to a system 
retry). 
● Fuzzy Duplicates: Records that are visually similar but not identical due to typos or 
formatting differences (e.g., "Rahul Mehta" vs. "Rahul Mehtaa" or "IBM" vs. "I.B.M."). 



Question 5: Why should data validation be performed during transformation rather 
than after loading? Validation should happen during transformation (before loading) to 
prevent "garbage in, garbage out". If invalid data is loaded into the data warehouse: 
● It becomes expensive and complex to clean up later. 
● It may corrupt existing historical data or aggregates. 
● It ensures that only clean, reliable data reaches the end-users and BI tools. 



Question 6: Explain how business rules help in validating data accuracy. Give an 
example. 
● Role: Business rules translate real-world business logic into data constraints. They 
ensure the data makes sense in the context of the business operations. 
● Example: A business rule might state "Transaction Date cannot be in the future" or 
"Quantity must be greater than zero." If a record shows a sales date of 2050 or a 
quantity of -5, the validation rule flags it as an error. 
Practical Questions (Dataset Analysis) 



Question 7: Write an SQL query on Sales_Transactions to list all duplicate keys and 
their counts. The business key is defined as Customer_ID + Product_ID + 
Txn_Date + Txn_Amount. The query groups by these columns and filters for counts 
greater than 1. 
SQL 
SELECT  
Customer_ID,  
Product_ID,  
Txn_Date,  
Txn_Amount,  
COUNT(*) as Duplicate_Count 
FROM Sales_Transactions 
GROUP BY Customer_ID, Product_ID, Txn_Date, Txn_Amount 
HAVING COUNT(*) > 1; 
Based on the provided dataset, transactions 201, 203, and 208 for Customer C101 are 
duplicates. 



Question 8: Enforcing Referential Integrity 
● Scenario: Identify Customer_ID values in Sales_Transactions that do not exist 
in the Customers_Master table. 
● Analysis of Data: 
○ Customers_Master contains: C101, C102, C103, C104. 
○ Sales_Transactions contains: C101, C102, C103, C104, C105, C106. 
○ Violations: C105 and C106 exist in transactions but are missing from the 
master list. 
● SQL Query to Detect Violations: 
SQL 
SELECT DISTINCT s.Customer_ID 
FROM Sales_Transactions s 
LEFT JOIN Customers_Master c ON s.Customer_ID = c.CustomerID 
WHERE c.CustomerID IS NULL; 

